# vim: set ft=markdown:

wat
===

A logbook for software engineers.

logbook
-------

Let's loosely define a logbook as:

  A record of important events.

organizing and writing the logbook
----------------------------------

  The following is a bastardized hacking of chapter 5, titled "Organizing and
  writing the Notebook", from Howard B. Kanare's book "Writing the Laboratory
  Notebook".

The key to writing a useful logbook is simple clarity: Clear layout, clear
descriptions. No single system for setting up the logbook will be the best
system for all people in all situations. You must adopt a flexible attitude
about how to set up the logbook. Keep in mind that anyone should be able to
pick up your logbook and understand what you have just written.

You need a flexible attitude because you must consider your own perspective
when you write the logbook as well as the perspective of future readers. If you
are recording analytical results, a straightforward tabulation is most sensible
because you and future readers can best make sense of carefully laid-out data.
Research is best handled by a narrative description, as if you were telling a
story to someone who was not present for the original event.  Flexibility in
organizing the logbook means sometimes abbreviating subjects and sometimes
spelling them out in detail.

During the course of your career, you will use logbooks for many activities: to
plan work and experiments; make safety notes; record data and observations;
perform calculations; discuss results of work and experiments; describe
inventions; track assignments; review progress; and keep track of supplies and
equipment performance.

Think of each job or project that you are about to begin recording as a
separate entity from the previous entries, and ask yourself, "How should I
organize the headings for this project's topics for maximum clarity?" Routine
work often needs no more than a sentence or two of background explanation before
getting into the actual experiment, observation, measurment, design, or
implementation.

The deductive method can serve as a template for those looking for help getting
started.

1. Introduction

Some people use the heading "Purpose" rather than "Introduction" because this
section focuses on the specific short-term goal of the work. In the remainder
of the introduction, provide explanation and support of the proposed work: Why
is the work being undertaken? What related work has been done (by others,
yourself)? Cite the literature. What were the results of this previous work?
Why was the current experiment chosen? Show the relevant calculations that were
needed.

For routine work, the length of the introduction may be as brief as a single
sentence. On the other hand, the introduction to a substantial amount of work
may warrant many pages and consist of separate subsections with headings such
as "Literature Survey," "Calculations," "Possible Experiments," or
"Predictions." During the course of the work, experiment, analaysis, you will
frequently refer to the "Introduction" section to check calculations or to
reasses the reasons for choosing a particular approach to the problem.
Therefore, after several large entries, summarize your work up to that point
and clearly mark it.

2. Plan

If you omit the plan and jump into a narrative, then your readers will likely
have trouble understanding what you were doing. A clear statement of the
problem means that you understand what you want to do and that you are focused
on a particular approach to solving the problem. For large projects, a
well-described plan is a help when you begin to make tasks. When discussing the
work with others, a clear statement of the plan is essential so that everyone
is on the same wavelength. This section may avoid unwittingly repeating
previous work; therefore, include it in every write-up.

Use simple sentences to state the work to be done. References to previous work
can often substitute for writing detailed plans, but should not substitue for
careful planning.

Information presented in the introduction should not be recapitulated in the
plan section. The introduction should be a general look backward at what has
been done to date and the reasons for undertaking the current problem. The plan
should be a look forward, describing the specific work to be done. If the plan
is presented as a list or outline, you can insert references to each item of
the plan is actually accomplished.

3. Observations and Data

This section might be considered the heart of your logging because, in it, you
actually record the observations that you make during the course of your work.
These notes and data will lead you to accept or abandon a plan and help you
decide the course of future work. You must be as objective and honest in
recording your observations and data as you are in obtaining them.

In this section, you wil record raw data (also called primary data). This raw
data is precious. Treat it with the care and respect that you would give to a
family heirloom. Indeed, the data may be passed on to another generation who
have to trust your observations and make use of your work.

Record the data as completely as possible and leave interpretation of the
observations for later. With this attitude, you are better able to concentrate
on your observations. You will be less likely to make mistakes if you are not
at the same time doing work and drawing conclusions. To get the most from your
work, wait until the work is completely before deciding which data are useful,
which data are useless, and which data need additional study.

However, you should always be on the lookout for the novel, unexpected
happening. As Pasteur observed, "Chance favors only the prepared mind."

Most of the observations and data section can be a narrative description, a
story, telling what you did and what you saw. Use the first person, if
appropriate, to make clear that you did the work. If someone else did the work,
be sure that point is obvious. Write in reasonably brief declarative sentences
as the work progresses. If you write convoluted or complex sentences with many
parenthetic phrases, perhaps with chains of dependent clauses (not a good idea
anyway), you will make future reading difficult and may very well obscure the
main points of your work.

More than sixty years ago, Reginald Hughes wrote, "The cardinal merits of good
notes are lucidity, brevity, and simplicity." Today we say, "Notes should be
clear, concise, and complete." To write the most useful notes, you must follow
several principles. The most important principle is that observations and data
are recorded immediately.

Simply put, write down whatever happens, when it happens. Don't wait until the
end of the day to sit down and recollect your thoughts; you must plan for
adequate time to write notes. Don't try to squeeze your notewriting into spare
moments between the more exciting aspects of your work. Make notekeeping an
integral part of whatever you do.

A notetaker's demeanor generally falls between two extremes. Some are
methodical and concerned about every step they take, Pasteur-types (P-types),
and some rush headlong into the work, eager "to get their hands dirty" without
adequate planning, LeMonnier-types (L-types). L-types keep sloppy and mostly
useless notes, whereas P-types keep the best and most valuable notes.
Undoubtedly, you should have some characteristics of both types within you and
bring to the surface either the enthusiasm or the caution, as the situation
warrants.

How much detail should be recorded in your notes? Could someone who is
competent in your field pick up your logbook and repeat your work solely from
the written description without additional explanation? If the answer is yes,
then you are doing a good job. Too many details are better than for you to
assume that a future reader (perhaps you!) will know all about your work. Don't
be embarassed to describe what you think is a sloppy or poor technique. Your
results hinge on what you actually do, not on how nicely you tell everyone it
was done.

A good drawing can save you several pages of writing and often conveys a better
sense of the device you want to describe than words alone could do.

4. Discussion of Results

This section provides you with the opportunity to reflect on what you did and
what you saw during the course of your work. Write this section after the work
is completed. If an idea occurs to you while recording the observations and data,
put it into the logbook at that time to preserve continuity and document the
circumstances under which the work took place. However, as a matter of general
practice, concentrate on making observations while performing the experiment
and concentrate on interpreting the results after they have been recorded.

This section in which you truly "think in the logbook." An idea may occur
once, and only briefly: catch it while you can and freeze it onto the page for
further study.

Often you will want the opinion of a colleague regarding some recent work and
your interpretation of the results. A thorough discussion section is better
than a brief summary of what you found. Do not use the discussion section to
simply restate the results. Use it instead to *understand* the results. If the
the results clearly fit your goals, then say so. If the two are at odds, say so
and discuss why. Speculation is approprate for this seciton, but not in the
section used to record the results.

5. Conclusion

In this last section of your notes, you should summarize the goal of your work,
what was done, and what you found. Typically, the conclusion can be handled in
one or two pages for long projects and in one or two sentences for routine work.
Several subjects should be included in the conclusion: Was the goal of the work
achieved? Was the model substantiated or disproved? How well did the design
work toward achieving the goal? What should have been done differently? What
should be done next?

Some people like to make their conclusions especially clear by numbering them.
The more important ones are placed first, and the less important conclusions
are last. This idea is a good one. When you sit down to write up your work more
formally, having the conclusions laid out in front of you is indeed a big help.
Looking at it another way, your conclusion section should contain all the
information that ou would put into an abstract describing the work.

literature survey
-----------------

  Like the text surrounding this section, the following paragraph is a slightly
  altered version of an explanation provided elsewhere. In this case, it's from
  Yahoo. [https://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20100606130459AALlQwB]

Read and report on what the literature in a field has to say about your topic or
subject. There may be a lot of literature or there may be a little. Either way,
the goal is to show that you have read and understand the positions of others
who have studied the problem that you are working on, you can do this by way of
comparing and contrasting, simple summarization, or any number of other devices.

training record
---------------

One of the handiest uses of a logbook is to keep track of new methods,
techniques, procedures, or other lessons you learn on the job. Even though you
may have a manual of information, you will also gain insights while doing the
work, some of which are never formally written down. These little "aha!"
moments are often as important (if not more so!) than the original
documentation. Ask questions and take time to write down the answers. The act
of writing helps you remember.

method
======

This is more than an introduction of a new tool. It will require a change in
how I work. This is what I'm after.

As I work, I will be adding entries into my logbook. These entries will range
from a few sentences to several pages. In addition, I will take time out of the
morning, end of work day, and end of day, to plan for the day and then, later,
to recap and prepare for the next day.
